# **ISA-444-Final-Project-Hotel-Occupancy-Forecasting**
This repository contains my final project for ISA 444 Business Forecasting at Miami University. The objective of this project is to forecast hotel occupancy rates over the next 28 days using a variety of baseline, statistical, machine learning, neural, and foundational forecasting models.

**Forecasting Overview**
The sample_hotels.parquet dataset contains daily occupancy rate observations for 19 (though later filtered to 17) unique hotel properties. The goal of this project is to generate a 28 day occupancy forecast for each hotel series using multiple forecasting approaches and compare model performance. The following forecasting models were implemented throughout the project:

1. Baseline Models - Naive, SeasonalNaive
2. Statistical Models - AutoETS, AutoARIMA
3. Machine Learning Models - LightGBM, TabPFN
4. Neural Forecasting Models - NBEATS, NHITS
5. Foundational Models - Chronos

To ensure consistency across all forecasting methods, the project uses a 5-fold cross validation with a forecast time horizon of 28 days.

**Forecasting Design**
The dataset contains On-the-Books (OTB) variables representing future booking activity. OTB variables within the 1 - 28 day forecast window were excluded from the machine learning, neural, and foundationl models because these values contain more complete booking information. Including these features would make the forecasting problem easier for the models as well.

Additionally, occupancy lag variables within the 1 - 28 window were removed from the machine learning, neural, and foundational models to reduce dependence on short term autocorrelation. Because hotel occupancy rates are often highly correlated with recent data, including the recent lag values could cause the models to rely heavily on occupancy rate rather than learning the broader patterns.

**Evaluation Metrics**
Model performance was evaluated using the following forecasting metrics:

1. ME (Bias)
2. MAE
3. RMSE
   
Because several hotel occupancy series contain values near zero, MAPE became unstable and was thus removed from the analysis to place a greater emphasis on the other metrics

In addition to the evaluation metrics above, model win counts were also calculated. A model win occurs when a forecasting method achieves the lowest forecasting error for a specific metric on a given series.

**Forecasting Outputs and Visualization**
The repository contains several CSV files storing the forecasting outputs by generated by each model on the testing set including:

1. Baseline_Forecasts.csv
2. MachineLearning_Forecasts.csv
3. Neural_Forecasts.csv
4. TimeCopilot_Forecasts.csv

Each file contains the 28-day occupancy forecasts generated for each hotel property by the corresponding forecasting methods. Cross-validation evaluation results and model winners can be found in:

- Hotel_Series_Model_Winners.csv. 

Additionally, forecast visualizations comparing actual occupancy values against model predictions can be generated using the final section of: 

- Model_Pipeline.ipynb
